.. _2.2.3_py:

2.2.3 DHT-11
============

Introduction
--------------

The digital temperature and humidity sensor DHT11 is a composite sensor
that contains a calibrated digital signal output of temperature and
humidity. The technology of a dedicated digital modules collection and
the technology of the temperature and humidity sensing are applied to
ensure that the product has high reliability and excellent stability.

The sensors include a wet element resistive sensor and a NTC temperature
sensor and they are connected to a high performance 8-bit
microcontroller.

Required Components
------------------------------

In this project, we need the following components. 

.. image:: ../img/list_2.2.3_dht-11.png

It's definitely convenient to buy a whole kit, here's the link: 

.. list-table::
    :widths: 20 20 20
    :header-rows: 1

    *   - Name	
        - ITEMS IN THIS KIT
        - LINK
    *   - Raphael Kit
        - 337
        - |link_Raphael_kit|

You can also buy them separately from the links below.

.. list-table::
    :widths: 30 20
    :header-rows: 1

    *   - COMPONENT INTRODUCTION
        - PURCHASE LINK

    *   - :ref:`cpn_gpio_extension_board`
        - |link_gpio_board_buy|
    *   - :ref:`cpn_breadboard`
        - |link_breadboard_buy|
    *   - :ref:`cpn_wires`
        - |link_wires_buy|
    *   - :ref:`cpn_resistor`
        - |link_resistor_buy|
    *   - :ref:`cpn_humiture_sensor`
        - |link_humiture_buy|

Schematic Diagram
-----------------

.. image:: ../img/image326.png


Experimental Procedures
-----------------------

**Step 1:** Build the circuit.

.. image:: ../img/image207.png

**Step 2:** Go to the folder of the code.

.. raw:: html

   <run></run>

.. code-block::

    cd ~/raphael-kit/python/

**Step 3:** Run the executable file.

.. raw:: html

   <run></run>

.. code-block::

    sudo python3 2.2.3_DHT.py

After the code runs, the program will print the temperature and humidity
detected by DHT11 on the computer screen.

**Code**

.. note::

    You can **Modify/Reset/Copy/Run/Stop** the code below. But before that, you need to go to  source code path like ``raphael-kit/python``. After modifying the code, you can run it directly to see the effect.


.. raw:: html

    <run></run>

.. code-block:: python

    import RPi.GPIO as GPIO
    import time

    dhtPin = 17

    GPIO.setmode(GPIO.BCM)

    MAX_UNCHANGE_COUNT = 100

    STATE_INIT_PULL_DOWN = 1
    STATE_INIT_PULL_UP = 2
    STATE_DATA_FIRST_PULL_DOWN = 3
    STATE_DATA_PULL_UP = 4
    STATE_DATA_PULL_DOWN = 5

    def readDht11():
        GPIO.setup(dhtPin, GPIO.OUT)
        GPIO.output(dhtPin, GPIO.HIGH)
        time.sleep(0.05)
        GPIO.output(dhtPin, GPIO.LOW)
        time.sleep(0.02)
        GPIO.setup(dhtPin, GPIO.IN, GPIO.PUD_UP)

        unchanged_count = 0
        last = -1
        data = []
        while True:
            current = GPIO.input(dhtPin)
            data.append(current)
            if last != current:
                unchanged_count = 0
                last = current
            else:
                unchanged_count += 1
                if unchanged_count > MAX_UNCHANGE_COUNT:
                    break

        state = STATE_INIT_PULL_DOWN

        lengths = []
        current_length = 0

        for current in data:
            current_length += 1

            if state == STATE_INIT_PULL_DOWN:
                if current == GPIO.LOW:
                    state = STATE_INIT_PULL_UP
                else:
                    continue
            if state == STATE_INIT_PULL_UP:
                if current == GPIO.HIGH:
                    state = STATE_DATA_FIRST_PULL_DOWN
                else:
                    continue
            if state == STATE_DATA_FIRST_PULL_DOWN:
                if current == GPIO.LOW:
                    state = STATE_DATA_PULL_UP
                else:
                    continue
            if state == STATE_DATA_PULL_UP:
                if current == GPIO.HIGH:
                    current_length = 0
                    state = STATE_DATA_PULL_DOWN
                else:
                    continue
            if state == STATE_DATA_PULL_DOWN:
                if current == GPIO.LOW:
                    lengths.append(current_length)
                    state = STATE_DATA_PULL_UP
                else:
                    continue
        if len(lengths) != 40:
            #print ("Data not good, skip")
            return False

        shortest_pull_up = min(lengths)
        longest_pull_up = max(lengths)
        halfway = (longest_pull_up + shortest_pull_up) / 2
        bits = []
        the_bytes = []
        byte = 0

        for length in lengths:
            bit = 0
            if length > halfway:
                bit = 1
            bits.append(bit)
        #print ("bits: %s, length: %d" % (bits, len(bits)))
        for i in range(0, len(bits)):
            byte = byte << 1
            if (bits[i]):
                byte = byte | 1
            else:
                byte = byte | 0
            if ((i + 1) % 8 == 0):
                the_bytes.append(byte)
                byte = 0
        #print (the_bytes)
        checksum = (the_bytes[0] + the_bytes[1] + the_bytes[2] + the_bytes[3]) & 0xFF
        if the_bytes[4] != checksum:
            #print ("Data not good, skip")
            return False

        return the_bytes[0], the_bytes[2]

    def main():

        while True:
            result = readDht11()
            if result:
                humidity, temperature = result
                print ("humidity: %s %%,  Temperature: %s ℃" % (humidity, temperature))
            time.sleep(1)

    def destroy():
        GPIO.cleanup()

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        try:
            main()
        except KeyboardInterrupt:
            destroy() 

**Code Explanation**

.. code-block:: python

    def readDht11():
        GPIO.setup(dhtPin, GPIO.OUT)
        GPIO.output(dhtPin, GPIO.HIGH)
        time.sleep(0.05)
        GPIO.output(dhtPin, GPIO.LOW)
        time.sleep(0.02)
        GPIO.setup(dhtPin, GPIO.IN, GPIO.PUD_UP)
        unchanged_count = 0
        last = -1
        data = []
        #...

This function is used to implement the functions of DHT11. It stores the
detected data in the the_bytes[] array. DHT11 transmits data of 40 bits
at a time. The first 16 bits are related to humidity, the middle 16 bits
are related to temperature, and the last eight bits are used for
verification. The data format is:

**8bit humidity integer data** +\ **8bit humidity decimal data**
+\ **8bit temperature integer data** + **8bit temperature decimal data**
+ **8bit check bit**.

When the validity is detected via the check bit, the function returns
two results: 1. error; 2. humidity and temperature.

.. code-block:: python

    checksum = (the_bytes[0] + the_bytes[1] + the_bytes[2] + the_bytes[3]) & 0xFF
    if the_bytes[4] != checksum:
        #print ("Data not good, skip")
        return False

    return the_bytes[0], the_bytes[2]

For example, if the received date is 00101011(8-bit value of humidity
integer) 00000000 (8-bit value of humidity decimal) 00111100 (8-bit
value of temperature integer) 00000000 (8-bit value of temperature
decimal) 01100111 (check bit)

**Calculation:**

00101011+00000000+00111100+00000000=01100111.

If the final result is equal to the check bit data, the data
transmission is abnormal: return False.

If the final result is equal to the check bit data, the received data is
correct, then there will return the_bytes[0] and the_bytes[2] and output
“Humidity =43%，Temperature =60C”.

Phenomenon Picture
------------------

.. image:: ../img/image209.jpeg