.. _2.1.7_c:

2.1.7 Potentiometer
=========================

Introduction
------------

The ADC function can be used to convert analog signals to digital
signals, and in this experiment, ADC0834 is used to get the function
involving ADC. Here, we implement this process by using potentiometer.
Potentiometer changes the physical quantity -- voltage, which is
converted by the ADC function.

Required Components
------------------------------

In this project, we need the following components. 

.. image:: ../img/list_2.1.4_potentiometer.png

It's definitely convenient to buy a whole kit, here's the link: 

.. list-table::
    :widths: 20 20 20
    :header-rows: 1

    *   - Name	
        - ITEMS IN THIS KIT
        - LINK
    *   - Raphael Kit
        - 337
        - |link_Raphael_kit|

You can also buy them separately from the links below.

.. list-table::
    :widths: 30 20
    :header-rows: 1

    *   - COMPONENT INTRODUCTION
        - PURCHASE LINK

    *   - :ref:`cpn_gpio_extension_board`
        - |link_gpio_board_buy|
    *   - :ref:`cpn_breadboard`
        - |link_breadboard_buy|
    *   - :ref:`cpn_wires`
        - |link_wires_buy|
    *   - :ref:`cpn_resistor`
        - |link_resistor_buy|
    *   - :ref:`cpn_led`
        - |link_led_buy|
    *   - :ref:`cpn_potentiometer`
        - |link_potentiometer_buy|
    *   - :ref:`cpn_adc0834`
        - \-

Schematic Diagram
-----------------

.. image:: ../img/image311.png


.. image:: ../img/image312.png


Experimental Procedures
-----------------------

**Step 1:** Build the circuit.

.. image:: ../img/image180.png


.. note::
    Please place the chip by referring to the corresponding position
    depicted in the picture. Note that the grooves on the chip should be on
    the left when it is placed.

**Step 2:** Open the code file.

.. raw:: html

   <run></run>

.. code-block::

    cd ~/raphael-kit/c/2.1.7/

**Step 3:** Compile the code.

.. raw:: html

   <run></run>

.. code-block::

    gcc 2.1.7_Potentiometer.c -lwiringPi

**Step 4:** Run.

.. raw:: html

   <run></run>

.. code-block::

    sudo ./a.out

After the code runs, rotate the knob on the potentiometer, the intensity
of LED will change accordingly.

.. note::

    If it does not work after running, or there is an error prompt: \"wiringPi.h: No such file or directory\", please refer to :ref:`install_wiringpi`.

**Code**

.. code-block:: c

    #include <wiringPi.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <softPwm.h>

    typedef unsigned char uchar;
    typedef unsigned int uint;

    #define     ADC_CS    0
    #define     ADC_CLK   1
    #define     ADC_DIO   2
    #define     LedPin    3

    uchar get_ADC_Result(uint channel)
    {
        uchar i;
        uchar dat1=0, dat2=0;
        int sel = channel > 1 & 1;
        int odd = channel & 1;

        pinMode(ADC_DIO, OUTPUT);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CS, 0);
        // Start bit
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        // Single End mode
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        // ODD
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,odd);  delayMicroseconds(2);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        // Select
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,sel);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);

        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);

        for(i=0;i<8;i++)
        {
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);    delayMicroseconds(2);

            pinMode(ADC_DIO, INPUT);
            dat1=dat1<<1 | digitalRead(ADC_DIO);
        }

        for(i=0;i<8;i++)
        {
            dat2 = dat2 | ((uchar)(digitalRead(ADC_DIO))<<i);
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        }

        digitalWrite(ADC_CS,1);
        pinMode(ADC_DIO, OUTPUT);
        return(dat1==dat2) ? dat1 : 0;
    }

    int main(void)
    {
        uchar analogVal;
        if(wiringPiSetup() == -1){ //when initialize wiring failed,print messageto screen
            printf("setup wiringPi failed !");
            return 1;
        }
        softPwmCreate(LedPin,  0, 100);
        pinMode(ADC_CS,  OUTPUT);
        pinMode(ADC_CLK, OUTPUT);

        while(1){
            analogVal = get_ADC_Result(0);
            printf("Current analogVal : %d\n", analogVal);
            softPwmWrite(LedPin, analogVal);
            delay(100);
        }
        return 0;
    }

**Code Explanation**

.. code-block:: c

    #define     ADC_CS    0
    #define     ADC_CLK   1
    #define     ADC_DIO   2
    #define     LedPin    3

Define CS, CLK, DIO of ADC0834, and connect them to GPIO0, GPIO1 and
GPIO2 respectively. Then attach LED to GPIO3.

.. code-block:: c

    uchar get_ADC_Result(uint channel)
    {
        uchar i;
        uchar dat1=0, dat2=0;
        int sel = channel > 1 & 1;
        int odd = channel & 1;

        pinMode(ADC_DIO, OUTPUT);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CS, 0);
        // Start bit
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        // Single End mode
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        // ODD
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,odd);  delayMicroseconds(2);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        // Select
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,sel);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);

        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
        digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        for(i=0;i<8;i++)
        {
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);    delayMicroseconds(2);

            pinMode(ADC_DIO, INPUT);
            dat1=dat1<<1 | digitalRead(ADC_DIO);
        }

        for(i=0;i<8;i++)
        {
            dat2 = dat2 | ((uchar)(digitalRead(ADC_DIO))<<i);
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        }

        digitalWrite(ADC_CS,1);
        pinMode(ADC_DIO, OUTPUT);
        return(dat1==dat2) ? dat1 : 0;
    }

There is a function of ADC0834 to get Analog to Digital Conversion. The
specific workflow is as follows:

.. code-block:: c

    digitalWrite(ADC_CS, 0);

Set CS to low level and start enabling AD conversion.

.. code-block:: c

    // Start bit
    digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
    digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
    digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);

When the low-to-high transition of the clock input occurs at the first
time, set DIO to 1 as Start bit. In the following three steps, there are
3 assignment words.

.. code-block:: c

    //Single End mode
    digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
    digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
    digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);

As soon as the low-to-high transition of the clock input occurs for the
second time, set DIO to 1 and choose SGL mode.

.. code-block:: c

    // ODD
    digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
    digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,odd);  delayMicroseconds(2);
    digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);

Once occurs for the third time, the value of DIO is controlled by the
variable **odd**.

.. code-block:: c

    //Select
    digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
    digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,sel);    delayMicroseconds(2);
    digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);

The pulse of CLK converted from low level to high level for the forth
time, the value of DIO is controlled by the variable **sel**.

Under the condition that channel=0, sel=0, odd=0, the operational
formulas concerning **sel** and **odd** are as follows:

.. code-block:: c

    int sel = channel > 1 & 1;
    int odd = channel & 1;

When the condition that channel=1, sel=0, odd=1 is met, please refer to
the following address control logic table. Here CH1 is chosen, and the
start bit is shifted into the start location of the multiplexer register
and conversion starts.

.. image:: ../img/image313.png


.. code-block:: c

    digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
    digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);
    digitalWrite(ADC_DIO,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);

Here, set DIO to 1 twice, please ignore it.

.. code-block:: c

    for(i=0;i<8;i++)
        {
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);    delayMicroseconds(2);

            pinMode(ADC_DIO, INPUT);
            dat1=dat1<<1 | digitalRead(ADC_DIO);
        }

In the first for() statement, as soon as the fifth pulse of CLK is
converted from high level to low level, set DIO to input mode. Then the
conversion starts and the converted value is stored in the variable
dat1. After eight clock periods, the conversion is complete.

.. code-block:: c

    for(i=0;i<8;i++)
        {
            dat2 = dat2 | ((uchar)(digitalRead(ADC_DIO))<<i);
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,1);    delayMicroseconds(2);
            digitalWrite(ADC_CLK,0);    delayMicroseconds(2);
        }

In the second for() statement, output the converted values via DO after
other eight clock periods and store them in the variable dat2.

.. code-block:: c

    digitalWrite(ADC_CS,1);
    pinMode(ADC_DIO, OUTPUT);
    return(dat1==dat2) ? dat1 : 0;

return(dat1==dat2) ? dat1 : 0 is used to compare the value gotten during
the conversion and the output value. If they are equal to each other,
output the converting value dat1; otherwise, output 0. Here, the
workflow of ADC0834 is complete.

.. code-block:: c

    softPwmCreate(LedPin,  0, 100);

The function is to use software to create a PWM pin, LedPin, then the
initial pulse width is set to 0, and the period of PWM is 100 x 100us.

.. code-block:: c

    while(1){
            analogVal = get_ADC_Result(0);
            printf("Current analogVal : %d\n", analogVal);
            softPwmWrite(LedPin, analogVal);
            delay(100);
        }

In the main program, read the value of channel 0 that has been connected
with a potentiometer. And store the value in the variable analogVal then
write it in LedPin. Now you can see the brightness of LED changing with
the value of the potentiometer.

Phenomenon Picture
------------------

.. image:: ../img/image181.jpeg


