.. _2.2.3_c:

2.2.3 DHT-11
==================

Introduction
--------------

The digital temperature and humidity sensor DHT11 is a composite sensor
that contains a calibrated digital signal output of temperature and
humidity. The technology of a dedicated digital modules collection and
the technology of the temperature and humidity sensing are applied to
ensure that the product has high reliability and excellent stability.

The sensors include a wet element resistive sensor and a NTC temperature
sensor and they are connected to a high performance 8-bit
microcontroller.

**Required Components**
------------------------------

In this project, we need the following components. 

.. image:: ../img/list_2.2.3_dht-11.png

It's definitely convenient to buy a whole kit, here's the link: 

.. list-table::
    :widths: 20 20 20
    :header-rows: 1

    *   - Name	
        - ITEMS IN THIS KIT
        - LINK
    *   - Raphael Kit
        - 337
        - |link_Raphael_kit|

You can also buy them separately from the links below.

.. list-table::
    :widths: 30 20
    :header-rows: 1

    *   - COMPONENT INTRODUCTION
        - PURCHASE LINK

    *   - :ref:`GPIO Extension Board`
        - |link_gpio_board_buy|
    *   - :ref:`Breadboard`
        - |link_breadboard_buy|
    *   - :ref:`Jumper Wires`
        - |link_wires_buy|
    *   - :ref:`Resistor`
        - |link_resistor_buy|
    *   - :ref:`Humiture Sensor Module`
        - |link_humiture_buy|

Schematic Diagram
-----------------

.. image:: ../img/image326.png


Experimental Procedures
-----------------------

**Step 1:** Build the circuit.

.. image:: ../img/image207.png

**Step 2:** Go to the folder of the code.

.. raw:: html

   <run></run>

.. code-block::

    cd ~/raphael-kit/c/2.2.3/

**Step 3:** Compile the code.

.. raw:: html

   <run></run>

.. code-block::

    gcc 2.2.3_DHT.c -lwiringPi

**Step 4:** Run the executable file.

.. raw:: html

   <run></run>

.. code-block::

    sudo ./a.out

After the code runs, the program will print the temperature and humidity
detected by DHT11 on the computer screen.

.. note::

    If it does not work after running, or there is an error prompt: \"wiringPi.h: No such file or directory\", please refer to :ref:`install_wiringpi`.

**Code**

.. code-block:: c

    #include <wiringPi.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <stdint.h>

    #define maxTim 85
    #define dhtPin 0

    int dht11_dat[5] = {0,0,0,0,0};

    void readDht11() {
        uint8_t laststate = HIGH;
        uint8_t counter = 0;
        uint8_t j = 0, i;
        float Fah; // fahrenheit
        dht11_dat[0] = dht11_dat[1] = dht11_dat[2] = dht11_dat[3] = dht11_dat[4] = 0;
        // pull pin down for 18 milliseconds
        pinMode(dhtPin, OUTPUT);
        digitalWrite(dhtPin, LOW);
        delay(18);
        // then pull it up for 40 microseconds
        digitalWrite(dhtPin, HIGH);
        delayMicroseconds(40); 
        // prepare to read the pin
        pinMode(dhtPin, INPUT);

        // detect change and read data
        for ( i=0; i< maxTim; i++) {
            counter = 0;
            while (digitalRead(dhtPin) == laststate) {
                counter++;
                delayMicroseconds(1);
                if (counter == 255) {
                    break;
                }
            }
            laststate = digitalRead(dhtPin);

            if (counter == 255) break;
            // ignore first 3 transitions
            if ((i >= 4) && (i%2 == 0)) {
                // shove each bit into the storage bytes
                dht11_dat[j/8] <<= 1;
                if (counter > 50)
                    dht11_dat[j/8] |= 1;
                j++;
            }
        }
        // check we read 40 bits (8bit x 5 ) + verify checksum in the last byte
        // print it out if data is good
        if ((j >= 40) && 
                (dht11_dat[4] == ((dht11_dat[0] + dht11_dat[1] + dht11_dat[2] + dht11_dat[3]) & 0xFF)) ) {
            Fah = dht11_dat[2] * 9. / 5. + 32;
            printf("Humidity = %d.%d %% Temperature = %d.%d *C (%.1f *F)\n", 
                    dht11_dat[0], dht11_dat[1], dht11_dat[2], dht11_dat[3], Fah);
        }
    }

    int main (void) {
        if(wiringPiSetup() == -1){ //when initialize wiring failed, print messageto screen
            printf("setup wiringPi failed !");
            return 1; 
        }
        while (1) {
            readDht11();
            delay(500); // wait 1sec to refresh
        }
        return 0 ;
    }

**Code Explanation**

.. code-block:: c

    void readDht11() {
        uint8_t laststate = HIGH;
        uint8_t counter = 0;
        uint8_t j = 0, i;
        float Fah; // fahrenheit
        dht11_dat[0] = dht11_dat[1] = dht11_dat[2] = dht11_dat[3] = dht11_dat[4] = 0;
        // ...
    }

This function is used to realize the function of DHT11.

It generally can be divided into 3 parts:

1. prepare to read the pin:

.. code-block:: c

    // pull pin down for 18 milliseconds
    pinMode(dhtPin, OUTPUT);
    digitalWrite(dhtPin, LOW);
    delay(18);
    // then pull it up for 40 microseconds
    digitalWrite(dhtPin, HIGH);
    delayMicroseconds(40); 
    // prepare to read the pin
    pinMode(dhtPin, INPUT);

Its communication flow is determined by work timing.

.. image:: ../img/image208.png


When DHT11 starts up, MCU will send a low level signal and then keep the
signal at high level for 40us. After that, the detection of the
condition of external environment will start.

2. read data:

.. code-block:: c

    // detect change and read data  
    for ( i=0; i< maxTim; i++) {
            counter = 0;
            while (digitalRead(dhtPin) == laststate) {
                counter++;
                delayMicroseconds(1);
                if (counter == 255) {
                    break;
                }
            }
            laststate = digitalRead(dhtPin);
            if (counter == 255) break;
            // ignore first 3 transitions
            if ((i >= 4) && (i%2 == 0)) {
                // shove each bit into the storage bytes
                dht11_dat[j/8] <<= 1;
                if (counter > 50)
                    dht11_dat[j/8] |= 1;
                j++;
            }
        }

The loop stores the detected data in the dht11_dat[] array. DHT11
transmits data of 40 bits at a time. The first 16 bits are related to
humidity, the middle 16 bits are related to temperature, and the last
eight bits are used for verification. The data format is:

**8bit humidity integer data** + **8bit humidity decimal data** + **8bit
temperature integer data** + **8bit temperature decimal data** + **8bit
check bit**.

3. Print Humidity & Temperature.

.. code-block:: c

    // check we read 40 bits (8bit x 5 ) + verify checksum in the last byte
    // print it out if data is good
    if ((j >= 40) && 
            (dht11_dat[4] == ((dht11_dat[0] + dht11_dat[1] + dht11_dat[2] + dht11_dat[3]) & 0xFF)) ) {
        Fah = dht11_dat[2] * 9. / 5. + 32;
        printf("Humidity = %d.%d %% Temperature = %d.%d *C (%.1f *F)\n", 
                dht11_dat[0], dht11_dat[1], dht11_dat[2], dht11_dat[3], Fah);
    }

When the data storage is up to 40 bits, check the validity of the data
through the **check bit (dht11_dat[4])**, and then print the temperature
and humidity.

For example, if the received data is 00101011(8-bit value of humidity
integer) 00000000 (8-bit value of humidity decimal) 00111100 (8-bit
value of temperature integer) 00000000 (8-bit value of temperature
decimal) 01100111 (check bit)

**Calculation:**

00101011+00000000+00111100+00000000=01100111.

The final result is equal to the check bit data, then the received data
is correct:

Humidity =43%ï¼ŒTemperature =60*C.

If it is not equal to the check bit data, the data transmission is not
normal and the data is received again.

Phenomenon Picture
------------------

.. image:: ../img/image209.jpeg